okay so I'm gonna start with this talk
about interstellar visitors and what I'm
talking about interstellar visitors I
don't mean that type not the ones of the
Third Kind pinched that from the movie
what I'm actually going to be talking
about is objects that have been detected
that have come into our solar system and
that we've got very strong reasons to
believe that they didn't originate in
our solar system so there are
interstellar origins the first one has
this very unpronounceable looking name
it's actually Omo ermua which sounds
like I'm making farm animal noises but
it's actually a Hawaiian god of some
description they're beginning to have to
scrape around for different names from
objects but they've chosen omou a lure
for this particular very strange object
that came into our solar system they've
discovered in 2017 and hence it gets the
designation one eye for the first
interstellar object / 2017 u1 and if you
know how to decode the u1 you can work
out what date it was first discovered in
2017 the image of it on the right is not
very inspiring it's the little white
dots and the moving streaks are stars
because they were tracking the object
and therefore the stars were trailing
across the imaging plate due to the
really quite rapid movement across the
sky of Omer Omer that was detected just
33 million kilometers from the earth so
that's quite a long way it's a lot
further away than the moon it's sir more
than 10 times further away than the moon
is from the earth but the slightly
worrying fact about it was that
when we detected it it was already
leaving the solar system on its outbound
trajectory so it had entered the solar
system and flown past the Sun and was on
its way out and achieved all of that
without anybody spotting it and we're we
worried when we find that we pick up
objects like that because we're supposed
to have this asteroid detecting space
guard system that's looking for
dangerous objects that might collide
with the earth and if this had been on a
collision course with the earth the
first we would have known about it was
as it entered the Earth's atmosphere far
too late to do anything at all so this
was the victory that it was on and we've
back tracked from the orbital mechanics
of it where it must have been so the
discovery was after perihelion the
closest point to the Sun there in
September of 2017 and we tracked it all
along the outbound track over to the
side there these are the dates are an
American date format here I apologize
for that
so 9/30 is the 30th of September so you
can see it came in from up at the top
there and entering the solar system
sometime in May and zipped through
closer to the Sun than the orbit of
mercury and then passed by out crossing
the orbits of Venus and the earth again
on the way out but you've got to try and
imagine this in 3d because it wasn't
traveling in the same flat plane as all
of the others so the entry angle was a
very high above the plane of the solar
system and it dived down through looped
underneath the Sun and then climbed back
out the other way it's perhaps shown
better in this wider view diagram so you
can imagine the plane of the solar
system there with Jupiter Saturn Uranus
and Neptune zorb it's shown distinct
and who mujer mujer diving in ducking
underneath the Sun and coming hurling
back out of the top and it's on an orbit
that we call our hyperbolic orbit orbits
of the planets are typically elliptical
usually nearly circular so they have an
a low eccentricity if it was a perfect
circle the eccentricity would be zero if
the eccentricity goes all the way up to
one at which point we orbit ceases to be
an ellipse and becomes an open curve
called a parabola and if it goes beyond
one then it's a very open curve which
looks more like it's coming in and going
out at a right angle in this diagram
only it looks curved near this very
center the outer arms look almost like
straight lines and indeed that's
approximately right and that's called a
hyperbola so we've got a little
animation I hope that this will come
through here we go that comes in dives
underneath the Sun just misses the earth
and goes back out on a slightly flatter
lower trajectory so quite an interesting
path clearly missed us but had a fairly
closer approach to Mercury on the way
there and not that far from the earth on
its departure
now the interesting thing about this
apart from the very unusual trajectory
was when it was studied looked at the
light curve of it the amount of light
the brightness and it seemed to be
exhibiting this rather curious cyclic
pattern as shown in the animated chart
on the right where it would dip down to
a minimum and then climb again and the
simulation to produce that sort of light
curve is as shown in the animation on
the left where you have a very long thin
object tumbling in multiple rotation
axes so it's producing sometimes a very
very narrow aspect it looks very faint
when it's doing that and at other times
a much wider aspect which means that it
reflects more light our way
hence the rather peculiar looking light
curve and so the artist's impression I
really like that was drawn up by a
Nesser artist to show what it might look
like was this a long thin chunk of
fairly shiny material a great elongated
shape five times longer than it is wide
and very unusual I mean a lot of
asteroids are roughly potato shaped as
we call them there don't have enough
gravity to overcome the strength of the
materials and pull themselves into a
sphere which most planets do by the
ratio of the strength of gravity to the
strength of the materials and of course
a bit of heating in the core from
trapped radioactivity and so on
but of course a small object like this
is frozen up solid doesn't have a liquid
core and doesn't have very much gravity
of its own either but soon after they
worked out that it was weird in this
particular way of being five times
longer than it is wide now the next
discovery was that it wasn't behaving
itself
in that it didn't seem to be following
Kepler's laws of planetary motion or
indeed Newton's laws of movement and
gravity and what I mean by that is that
he was leaving the solar system and it
was accelerating as it was leaving now
normally things will slow down as they
move away from the Sun because the
gravity of the Sun is pulling back on
them so they'd be accelerators they fall
in and then decelerate as they rise back
out of the gravity well on the way out
of the solar system but Omer Omer was
actually gaining a little bit of
acceleration and this was very peculiar
and it leads to speculation that what we
were looking at was in fact an alien
spacecraft that was taking a powers
trajectory and had come in through the
solar system and now was firing its
thrusters to leave and thereby not
following a Keplerian orbits and free
falling under gravity well it's not
aliens until it's aliens as they say we
have no proof of that in fact what we
think was happening is that it was
behaving in a way that we sometimes see
with comets only a rather strange type
of comet this one we think that it's
very shiny and very reflective and very
cold and it may well have come from one
of these dark molecular clouds like the
Barnard nebula on the right there where
it's not a hole in space it's not an
absence of stars it's a thick molecular
cloud of hydrogen gas and bits of dust
that are blocking our line of sight and
they also block the Starlight getting
into them so the coal are the center of
these molecular clouds can be incredibly
cold and what you can have happen is
it'd be cold enough for hydrogen it's
to freeze up as hydrogen ice and if
object had been formed in that way
inside one of these cold molecular
clouds and then hurled across space
perhaps by a passing star and it's
gravity then when it entered the earth
under some solar system heat from our
Sun would start to boil the hydrogen off
in the same way that it boils the water
off the outside of icy comets but with
comets we see the water refreeze and as
the tail that comet's tail as full of
little ice particles that's why it's but
so easy to spot but the hydrogen would
boil away and then it would be too warm
in the solar system for it to really
defy and we wouldn't see it but the
outgassing of all of that hydrogen could
provide the extra thrust that which
seemed to be propelling umemura making
us think that maybe we'd been invaded by
aliens for the first time in history and
it might also explain that the long thin
shape of this giant hydrogen icicle
maybe it was broken off some larger
object who knows but we haven't really
seen it up close enough as I say we
didn't detect it until it was running
away and one of the ideas that has come
up recently is to go chase it well the
problem is that it's going so fast it
has more than the necessary velocity to
escape the Sun on its hyperbolic orbit
and to catch up with it we need a very
fast spacecraft double the speed of the
new Horizons probe that took the very
quick eight year trip to Pluto now it's
possible that we could do that with a
chemical rocket by taking a slingshot
around Jupiter and a slingshot right
round very very close into the Sun using
a maneuver called the Oberth maneuver
fire your engines when you're deep in a
gravity well you get a lot more change
in velocity a lot more Delta V as the
rocket scientists would say out of its
which can boost your speed and the other
way of doing it would be to use a solar
sail one of these little tiny spacecraft
with a huge square mile our reflector
sail on it and shine a laser beam onto
that sail powered from the earth and
propel it across space and that would be
able to go much much faster than the
fastest chemical rocket and would be a
very useful interesting precursor to
perhaps a a full star shot of sending
some probes out to the nearest stars it
would still take us about 25 years to
catch Omer Omer because we've given it a
head start and it is going like a bat
out of hell so it's gonna be really
quite a difficult thing but it would be
an interesting possible chase target for
such a technology as one of these laser
powered photonics sails as they called
but a rumor is not the only visitor to
our solar system there's also who are
the second one
Boris off now this looks much more like
an ordinary comet in composition it's
imaged on the right there and you can
see the nucleus with a coma around it
and there and then the more diffuse tail
type structure typical of a comet and
this surpassed the Sun in December of
2019 so just six months ago now losing a
little bit of mess on the way and as a
nucleus round about a kilometer across
half a kilometer to one and a half
kilometers but it's also travelling very
very fast not bound to the Sun's gravity
and it's got an even more strongly
hyperbolic orbit omarama had a
eccentricity factor of 1.2 just enough
to make it escape the solar system
/ one is never coming back Borissov is
3.36 so tremendously fast and it's going
to leave the solar system with an excess
velocity of 32 kilometers per second
that's about as fast as we can make a
spacecraft leave the Earth's orbit and
they get slowed down a lot by climbing
out of the Sun's gravity well it's there
obvious that both Omalu are in red and
Boris off in yellow you can see Oh
murmurs quite strongly deflected by its
travel through the solar system with an
eccentricity of just one point - it bent
through about a right angle Boris off
was going so fast that it hardly even
noticed that the Sun was there was very
just slightly deflected by it with this
very open curve very high eccentricity
that means
well we've also we think been hit by a
third object that came into our solar
system from elsewhere and this hit the
earth in 2014 January came into the
atmosphere and blew up over Papua New
Guinea and that is in fact a photograph
of the object blowing up high up in the
atmosphere looking like this tremendous
fireball because they were managed to
take a couple of photographs from
different locations and get a 3d trace
of the direction of the orbits they
could work out that it was again on a
original hyperbolic orbit with an
eccentricity of 2.4 so a terrific speed
probably came into the solar system that
43.8 km/h no more more and it wasn't a
very big one this one just under a meter
in diameter and again we didn't see it
coming it came into the Earth's
atmosphere and blow up that was the
first we knew about it but some of these
sorts of objects come from a region out
way out beyond the normal definition of
the solar system called the Oort cloud
we've got a diagram of it on the right
suggested by Dutch astronomer Yanet as
the source of a lot of comet type
objects that we see we see some comets
that orbit around in the solar system in
irritably say in a normal way like
Halley's Comet that comes back every 76
years but others come in on these orbits
that when we calculate them look well
they look like parabolic orbits that go
out to infinity and we think that they
probably originated out of all of the
leftover builders rubble left well
beyond the solar system all these region
of millions and millions of icy comets
that are sitting out in this cloud of
debris around the solar system and just
waiting together
little nudge to perhaps tip them on a
course into falling towards the Sun and
then be flung out again and maybe a
passing star could do so because this
scale on this diagram is that one of
those logarithmic ones each step is
these two steps is 10 times further away
so it's in astronomical units we going
sort of planets going out to 10 to 30 au
in fact for Neptune and then the Kuiper
belt of leftover second asteroid belt
really leftover bits and pieces
including things like Pluto and Eris and
Sedna and then around about a thousand
to a hundred thousand au is the area
where we think is the the Oort cloud and
all these comets come from so again you
would get a small perturbation and just
be tipped into the solar system and this
is an example of one Comet 2017 u7 that
came into the solar system and actually
had a near encounter with Jupiter so
much so that it tipped the orbit into
one of these open hyperbolic
trajectories and so this one's never
coming back
Jupiter gave it a bit of a slingshot and
threw it out of the solar system forever
so that's going to disappear away from
our solar system and who knows might end
up entering some other solar system and
be detected by some alien astronomer in
a few tens of millions of years time
other objects though get a kick from
Jupiter that throws them out they can be
captured by it and this is B 0 v o9 a
three-kilometer object also spotted in
2014 and two plates on the right are in
the negative so the little black dots
that's helpfully been ringed in yellow
is the object concern and it's moved
between the the two plates there and
it's going the wrong way around the Sun
almost everything goes the same
direction around the Sun that
we do the same direction that the Sun
spins and that most of the planets spin
on their axis unless they've been tipped
upside down like possibly greenness and
Uranus but bees edge 509 is in an orbit
that takes it's just the same period of
time to orbit the Sun as Jupiter does 12
years so it's almost in the same orbit
as Jupiter but it's more elliptical and
you can see that in this diagram we've
got the Earth Mars Jupiter with its
orbit in white and the thousands of
white dots are the Jovian Trojan
asteroids that follow Jupiter around its
orbit in a two giant clusters they all
go the same way round but be Zed 5:09 is
going the other way round
and this makes its orbit very very
tricky to describe if you have sat on
Jupiter looking at B Z 509 you would see
a very peculiar effect and we've got it
in profile and in plan view here from
the point of view of Jupiter so in
profile at the top there you can see it
does a blue loop above the plane of your
orbit and a shorter purple loop below
the plane of the orbit but it's even
weirder when you look at the plan view
at the bottom there because Jupiter's
orbit is shown in black and the blue and
purple line that is a very strange shape
indeed crosses Jupiter's orbit twice
once it zips around inside Jupiter and
then it crosses to the outside and
doesn't does a most of a lap outside so
you'd alternately see it orbiting out
beyond you and then or doing another
shorter orbit inside of you so a very
curious relationship indeed especially
as it's going the wrong way all at once
nation of that here that this is what's
happening if you take a sort of view of
the solar system with the fixed stars in
the background as your fixed reference
point so Jupiter's moving around with
all its Jovian Trojan asteroids and B 0
509 well it's gonna make you feel sick
if you watch that for very long with
them going the wrong way around and the
question is is it stable and is it going
to crash and we think it's been doing it
for billions of years so it's actually
in a very long-term stable orbit
configuration as just missing Jupiter
repeatedly swapping from that inside
loop to the outside loop from Jupiter's
point of view very very curious object
indeed